The universe is all of space and time and their contents. It comprises all of existence, any fundamental interaction, physical process and physical constant, and therefore all forms of matter and energy, and the structures they form, from sub-atomic particles to entire galactic filaments.

The physical universe is defined as all of space and time and their contents. Such contents comprise all of energy in its various forms, including electromagnetic radiation and matter, and therefore planets, moons, stars, galaxies, and the contents of intergalactic space.

The field of cosmology establishes that space and time emerged together at the Big Bang about 13.8 billion years ago, and the universe has been expanding ever since. Within the first fraction of a second of the universe's existence, the four fundamental forces had separated.

The universe appears to be a smooth spacetime continuum consisting of three spatial dimensions and one temporal dimension. An event in the spacetime of the physical universe can be identified by a set of four coordinates.

General relativity is the geometric theory of gravitation published by Albert Einstein in 1915 and the current description of gravitation in modern physics. It is the basis of current cosmological models of the universe. General relativity generalizes special relativity and Newton's law of universal gravitation, providing a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time.

John Archibald Wheeler summarized the theory: Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve.

Of the four fundamental interactions, gravitation is the dominant at astronomical length scales. The remaining two interactions, the weak and strong nuclear forces, decline very rapidly with distance and their effects are confined mainly to sub-atomic length scales.

The observable universe contains as many as an estimated 2 trillion galaxies and as many as an estimated 10^24 stars. That is more stars than all the grains of beach sand on planet Earth, but less than the total number of atoms estimated in the universe as 10^82.

The universe is bathed in highly isotropic microwave radiation that corresponds to a thermal equilibrium blackbody spectrum of roughly 2.72548 kelvins. This is the cosmic microwave background radiation, a relic from the early universe.

The cosmological principle is the hypothesis that the large-scale universe is homogeneous and isotropic. A universe that is both homogeneous and isotropic looks the same from all vantage points and has no center.

Dark energy makes up about 68 percent of the total energy in the observable universe. Dark matter makes up about 27 percent. Ordinary matter accounts for less than 5 percent.

Dark matter is a hypothetical kind of matter that is invisible to the entire electromagnetic spectrum, but which accounts for most of the matter in the universe. The existence and properties of dark matter are inferred from its gravitational effects on visible matter.

The Standard Model of particle physics describes electromagnetic, weak, and strong nuclear interactions. It is supported by the experimental confirmation of the existence of particles predicted by the theory. The Standard Model does not accommodate gravity.

Hadrons are particles composed of quarks held together by the strong force. Protons and neutrons are hadrons. Leptons are elementary half-integer spin particles that do not undergo strong interactions. Electrons are the most common charged leptons.

A photon is the quantum of light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation. It is the carrier for the electromagnetic force. The photon has zero rest mass which allows long distance interactions.

The Big Bang singularity is the cosmological model describing the earliest development of the universe as an extremely hot and dense state. After the Planck epoch, the universe has been expanding to its present scale, with a very short but intense period of cosmic inflation within the first 10^-32 seconds.

Since the Big Bang, the universe has expanded monotonically. Our universe has just the right mass-energy density, equivalent to about 5 protons per cubic meter, which has allowed it to expand for the last 13.8 billion years.

The special theory of relativity predicts that if one observer sees two events happening in different places at the same time, a second observer who is moving relative to the first will disagree about simultaneity.

The fine-tuned universe hypothesis is the proposition that the conditions that allow the existence of observable life in the universe can only occur when certain universal fundamental physical constants lie within a very narrow range of values.

There are many competing hypotheses about the ultimate fate of the universe and about what preceded the Big Bang. Some physicists have suggested various multiverse hypotheses, in which the universe might be one among many.

Max Tegmark developed a four-part classification scheme for the different types of multiverses that scientists have suggested. The many-worlds interpretation and bubble universe theory are examples of multiverse concepts.

Ancient Greek and Indian philosophers developed models of the universe based on empirical evidence. Aristarchus proposed that the fixed stars and the Sun remain unmoved, and that the Earth revolves about the Sun. Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model with the Sun at the center.

Isaac Newton demonstrated that the same laws of motion and gravity apply to earthly and to celestial matter. Edmund Halley noted that an infinite space filled uniformly with stars would lead to the prediction that the nighttime sky would be as bright as the Sun itself, which became known as Olbers' paradox.
